---
title: [THE ART OF THE DECOY: HOW BANKSY BUILT THE FIRST MULTI-IDENTITY BRAND IN ART]
author: Bobby Bress
project: Breaking Banksy
originally_published: Medium
medium_url: https://medium.com/p/6e55ecb960bd
canonical_source: https://bobilon.github.io/breaking-banksy/articles/medium-6e55ecb960bd.html
---
#[THE ART OF THE DECOY: HOW BANKSY BUILT THE FIRST MULTI-IDENTITY BRAND IN ART]
THE ART OF THE DECOY: HOW BANKSY BUILT THE FIRST MULTI-IDENTITY BRAND IN ART
On a damp Bristol evening more than a decade ago, a photographer named Andrew believed he’d finally captured the shot that would solve one of contemporary culture’s strangest mysteries. He had followed a cluster of twenty-something men spilling out of a bar in Stokes Croft, watching them with the alertness of someone who has stared too long at rumor and wanted it to come true. One of the men seemed uncannily familiar — the narrow face, the hood pulled low, the rough stubble reminiscent of the now-canonical “Gunningham photo” circulating endlessly through tabloids and conspiracy forums.
Andrew raised his camera. The man glanced back, held the photographer’s gaze for just a beat too long, and walked on. Hours later the image went up on Reddit under a triumphant caption announcing that Banksy had been unmasked at last. It wasn’t Banksy. It wasn’t even close. It was simply someone who looked the way the internet had taught people Banksy ought to look.
By the 2010s, the hunt for Banksy had become a cultural pastime so ritualized that it no longer mattered whether the suspect resembled the art or the voice or the philosophical temperament behind the work. What mattered was whether a face matched the silhouette the public had already agreed upon. The entire process — the vigilante sightings, the half-remembered anecdotes, the forensic amateurism — had hardened into a mythological reflex. The search was less an investigation than a performance. And by then, the performance had become part of the brand.
What few stopped to consider was that the “suspect list,” as it came to be known, did not arise organically. It behaved too cleanly, too neatly, too usefully. Over time, it began to resemble something else entirely: a set of strategically convenient false identities whose value lay not in being believed, but in being believed by particular kinds of people.
Banksy’s greatest work, it turns out, may be the machine that obscures the artist.
I. The Crowd That Became the Cloak
Anonymity in art is ancient. Anonymous art, however, has traditionally relied on absence — a retreat from public life, a vanishing act. Banksy inverted the formula. He built an anonymity that expands rather than erases, that multiplies rather than subtracts. The decoys, rumors, and suspect identities didn’t diminish his presence; they amplified it. He became the only anonymous figure who grew more visible with each misidentification.
The elegance of the system lies in its reliance on the audience itself. Each new theory widens the circle of engagement. Each wrong answer strengthens the myth. The very failure to identify Banksy becomes the mechanism by which the artist becomes unavoidable.
The decoys reveal not just how Banksy hides, but how the public participates — eagerly, compulsively, almost gratefully — in being misled.
II. The Gunningham Effect: The Everyman Decoy
If one were engineering a plausible in-universe identity for a British street artist, Robin Gunningham would be difficult to improve upon. He is local enough to Bristol to satisfy regional pride, obscure enough to be believable, and photogenic in the way an unassuming man becomes photogenic when elevated by rumor. His biography — the travel, the dabbling in art, the drifting into Bristol’s subcultural orbit — is the sort of vaguely bohemian template that fits comfortably into public expectations without providing any real traction.
Gunningham functions as the decoy who makes the whole game feel grounded. He satisfies the yearning for an identifiable human being behind the stencils while remaining plausible but not definitive. His presence in the mythology appeals strongly to a certain demographic: young men who see in him a reflection of the talented, slightly wayward outsider who might quietly build a masterpiece in a rented room above a pub.
Yet the evidence for Gunningham as Banksy has always been curiously soft. The photographs are ambiguous. The address trails are speculative. The acquaintances quoted in articles seem strangely at ease with uncertainty, as though they are referencing a role someone may or may not be playing rather than attesting to a concrete identity. Gunningham, intentionally or not, embodies the principle of the perfect false flag: a decoy that absorbs suspicion without requiring the truth to suffer any exposure.
III. The Del Naja Hypothesis: Borrowed Celebrity
The Robert del Naja theory is irresistible for reasons that have little to do with evidence and everything to do with narrative seduction. Del Naja — a founding member of Massive Attack, a visual artist long before he was a musician, a politically engaged figure with a known history of stencil work — provides the cleanest story arc. If one charts Massive Attack’s tour dates against Banksy mural appearances, patterns emerge that are compelling enough to enthrall casual observers and conspiracy hobbyists alike.
The flaw in this theory is its convenience. Correlation, especially in rumor economies, metastasizes into causation with alarming speed.
But the theory’s power lies not in its plausibility but in its reach. By attaching Banksy to a global music icon, the myth absorbs an entire fanbase. Music journalists, subculture theorists, and nostalgia-rich trip-hop devotees all become invested in the idea that their world produced Banksy. Their investment broadens the artist’s cultural footprint far beyond the contemporary art sphere. Del Naja, whether knowingly or through benign indifference, serves as a celebrity-grade beacon that draws new audiences into the Banksy orbit.
Neither man has ever vigorously denied the connection. Both have allowed the rumor to hover in the atmosphere undisturbed. In branding terms, this is advantageous ambiguity — the state in which the untruth is more valuable than any definitive correction.
IV. The Hewlett Gambit: Mythmaking Symbiosis
Jamie Hewlett’s presence in the rumor matrix is peculiar in the best possible way. He does not simply resemble Banksy ideologically or stylistically. He built Gorillaz — a fictional band with fictional members who nevertheless headline festivals, sell records, and give interviews as if they were real. Hewlett understands persona construction at a level matched by very few artists of his generation. His entire creative life has been an exploration of the boundary between character and author, mask and maker.
The Hewlett theory, therefore, is not merely plausible. It is thematically exquisite.
More importantly, the Hewlett hypothesis draws in a different demographic cohort: animation fans, comic-culture enthusiasts, digital-era mythographers, and the sprawling fandom economies that have grown around hybrid media projects. For these communities, Hewlett represents a spiritual cousin to Banksy — a master of identity fiction, a conjurer of worlds.
Whether he played any intentional role in the Banksy myth hardly matters. His participation — active or passive — extends the brand’s reach into yet another subculture.
V. The Collective Theory: The Audience That Sees Itself
Perhaps the strangest and most revealing theory is the one that insists Banksy is not an individual at all but rather a collective. This idea survives not because it is evidentially strong but because it is psychologically flattering. It allows people to imagine themselves as part of the project. It transforms the artist into a movement, the signature into a symbol, the persona into a shared ethos.
This theory thrives in political circles that distrust individual genius narratives, in activist communities that valorize horizontal organization, in digital cultures that prefer open-source mythmaking to singular authorship. It is the most democratic of all the decoys and the one that most effectively disperses suspicion. It turns the public into both protector and participant.
The collective theory works because it allows the audience to recognize itself in the myth.
VI. The Architecture of the Myth
When the Gunningham archetype, the Del Naja aura, the Hewlett symbiosis, and the collective fantasy are placed alongside one another, a pattern emerges that is too elegant to be accidental. Each identity serves a different cultural constituency. Each draws a new demographic into the orbit. Each broadens the brand. And none of them — critically — threatens the safety of the true artist.
The result is an anonymity built through multiplication. Banksy hides behind not one face but many. The decoys form a shifting mask. The myth becomes a prism that reflects a different truth to each observer.
This is not evasion. This is design.
VII. The Ethics of the Phantom Celebrity
Banksy’s anonymity now raises questions that no previous artist has had to confront. What does it mean when a fictional identity becomes a global celebrity? When millions interact with a persona deliberately constructed to misdirect them? When a public figure exists primarily as a curated absence?
This is not merely concealment. It is a new category of cultural phenomenon: a human brand that exists without a confirmed human. A persona that thrives on indeterminacy. A celebrity who is, in any conventional sense, not there.
The morality of this system is complicated. The audience enjoys the deception, participates in it, and reinforces it. The pleasure lies not in revelation but in the perpetual extension of the mystery. Banksy did not exploit a cultural weakness; he revealed a cultural appetite.
The public no longer demands to know the truth. It demands the pleasure of not knowing.
VIII. The First Artist Powered by Networked Anonymity
Before the rise of social media, anonymity relied on scarcity and retreat. Banksy’s anonymity relies on abundance and acceleration. It needs viral rumor cycles, global meme-production, decentralized speculation, and a public trained to perform amateur forensics with a kind of gleeful futility. The identity game requires a constantly refreshed audience willing to mistake patterns for evidence because the patterns are entertaining.
Banksy did not simply benefit from the digital age; he is arguably the first artist whose myth could only exist in it.
IX. The Last Layer of the Mask
If there is a single through-line in the entire Banksy phenomenon, it is that the artist understands attention — not as currency, but as clay. The decoys are not obstacles to the art. They are an extension of it. Each theory is a doorway. Each misidentification is a paint stroke. Each demographic drawn into the mystery becomes part of the composition.
The world has spent two decades attempting to unmask Banksy. Yet the truth may be that the mask is the masterpiece.
Banksy’s ultimate trick was not convincing millions that he could be anyone. It was convincing them that he could be everyone.
In that collective misrecognition — in the pleasure of chasing a phantom — the artist created something unprecedented: a celebrity identity with no anchor in any single body, a persona built from the desires and projections of the crowd itself.
The false flags were never detours. They were the design. And all of us, eager detectives scribbling theories in the margins of the internet, became the final collaborators.




